bjbjLULU RAY SUAREZ: Finally tonight, the
true tale of a Christmas Eve attack and rescue
during World War II, retold by a Minnesota
congregation. Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro has our story. FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
At the annual holiday dinner at Westminster
Presbyterian Church in Minneapolis, people
are encouraged to share personal Christmas
stories. This year, Pastor Tim Hart-Andersen
delivered an epic. REV. TIM HART-ANDERSEN,
Westminster Presbyterian Church: So you are
a radio studio audience tonight for WPCB,
Westminster Presbyterian Church Broadcast
Company. (LAUGHTER) FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Dozens
of volunteers came together to build a set
simulating a 1940s-style radio drama, arranged
by "Prairie Home Companion" veteran and church
member Vern Sutton. It's based on a true story
the pastor heard from his father when he was
growing up. MAN: The night before Christmas,
1944. FRED DE SAM LAZARO: On Dec. 24, 1944,
as the decisive Battle of the Bulge raged,
some 2,200 American G.I.s boarded the ship
Leopoldville in England headed for the battle's
Belgian frontier. MAN: It just don't feel
like Christmas Eve. FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Hart-Andersen's
father, Hank Andersen, was crammed in the
ship's hold. REV. HENRY "HANK" ANDERSEN, Leopoldville
survivor: It was just a miserable situation.
So I said, let's go up on deck and sing Christmas
carols. I would say there were 15 to 20 of
us were there. And we were singing Christmas
carols. And I was leading them. And all of
a sudden, this is becoming a rather tender
story. And we can see the lights of Cherbourg
in the distance. FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The drama
used sound effects to convey the disaster
that was about to strike as the ship was just
off the French coast. Some 800 lives were
lost in the deadliest incident of the war
for the U.S. Army. WOMAN: Emergency stations.
Emergency stations. All hands to emergency
stations. The Leopold's been hit. WOMAN: The
U-boat torpedo hits the Leopoldville below
the waterline on the starboard side. Scores
of those lovely Yankee boys are killed instantly
by the explosion. Others drown as water rushes
into the ship. Most of the survivors stand
on the deck and watch as other ships come
alongside to begin rescue operations. MAN:
Hey, Sarge, Sarge, Sarge, what do we do? That
British destroyer, it s pulled up alongside
us. Shall we make a jump for it? REV. HENRY
"HANK" ANDERSEN: These guys were paralyzed.
They just would not jump. And -- and they
had seen some jump and not made it. So, it
was quite a jump across. And I remember getting
over there and sliding across what little
deck there was, slammed into the bulwark that
was there, staggered back up to the rail.
And the sight that I had made it enabled them
then to start jumping. MAN: Gee, Rosenblum,
are you going to jump? MAN: Is there another
choice? FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The character
Rosenblum was written into the drama when
Gail Rosenblum, a local columnist, came across
Andersen's story. Her late father, Sidney,
was on the ship, and she's convinced he was
in the singing group. And that, she'd like
to think, influenced her love of this music.
GAIL ROSENBLUM, Minneapolis Star Tribune:
My friends joke. They tease me because I'm
a Jewish girl who loves Christmas carols.
I always loved them as a girl. And so, when
I heard the story of Hank and put that all
together, I felt like now I understand why
I love them. They saved my father's life,
because all the men who came up on deck to
sing, thanks to Hank leading them up there,
they survived. And all the men who didn't
come up were the victims of that, you know,
that torpedo. REV. TIM HART-ANDERSEN: Her
father had this love of music before he went
into the service. My father did. And the more
we talked, the more we began to sense a kind
of narrative that really wound together in
some pretty remarkable ways. MAN: Hey, Archer,
can't a Jew enjoy the lights and sing a few
tunes? MAN: You sing Christmas music? MAN:
So, who do you think does the best Christmas
music? Ever wonder about that? Irving Berlin?
Mel Torme? Johnny Marks? All Jews. "Winter
Wonderland," "White Christmas" all invented
by my people. Who else would name a red-nosed
reindeer Rudolph? (LAUGHTER) FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
His family says Sid Rosenblum talked very
little about his war experience. He went on
to become a psychologist. Sid Rosenblum died
in 1988 at 63. Hank Andersen was headed to
a law career before the war, but became a
minister instead. He was an active civil rights
campaigner in the '60s, influenced during
the war by an all-black unit in the then-segregated
Army which fed and comforted the ship's survivors
when they reached land. REV. HENRY "HANK"
ANDERSEN: They surrounded us and sang Christmas
carols. And I -- I was so stunned. FRED DE
SAM LAZARO: At 87, Hank Andersen lives in
retirement with Mary Andersen, his wife of
64 years. MAN: The Yanks who survived found
a whole new meaning to that Christmas day.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Tim Hart-Andersen says
he's glad his father is still alive to see
an important story preserved by and for the
next generation, one that, in some ways, has
morphed into a sermon. REV. TIM HART-ANDERSEN:
I would hope that the kind of universal theme
here is that hope cannot be cut off and light
cannot be turned off. The human spirit can
sing its way through anything. RAY SUAREZ:
Fred's reporting is a partnership with the
Under-Told Stories Project at Saint Mary's
University of Minnesota. h$nU h$nU h$nU urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
country-region urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
City urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
PlaceType urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
PlaceName urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
place urn:schemas-microsoft-com:office:smarttags
State RAY SUAREZ: Finally tonight, the true
tale of a Christmas Eve attack and rescue
during World War II, retold by a Minnesota
congregation Normal Microsoft Office Word
RAY SUAREZ: Finally tonight, the true tale
of a Christmas Eve attack and rescue during
World War II, retold by a Minnesota congregation
Title Microsoft Office Word Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.8